Up there is the bridge at Kapitan Kebnikov,
the Russian icebreaker taking me
and the rest of Chris Hadfield's expedition around the Arctic
Nowadays, navigation is up there and on, well,
most ships are largely automatic
It is handled by GPS and computer driven charts
But tucked away on the bridge is an additional safety device
which is pretty much the same as the adventurer has used for centuries.
It is a sextant and it is used for astronomical navigation.
You get the angle between the horizon and a known star, even the sun,
at least when it is not overcast
consult a lookup table and use a bit of math,
and you have your latitude.
Now a hundred years ago when a sexist was the only way to navigate
the claims of the adventurer had to be taken from the records they held.
or just on faith.
Even to today
is no one sure who came first to the North Pole
Frederick Cook claimed to have reached it in 1908,
but his records are not entirely up,
and his evidence was questioned, especially by a man
who claimed to have reached the North Pole a year later: Robert Peary.
By most stories, Peary was a very unpleasant man,
but for many years he was commonly considered to have led
the first expedition that actually reached the geographic North Pole in 1909.
There is a memorial for him on a ridge at Cape York in Greenland,
though, it was, of course, placed by his widow.
But he was the only one
on the last part of his expedition trained in navigation,
the only one who knew how to use a sextant
and all his claims are false in the light of the hindsight
He reached with garenti - whoa - not the North Pole
And then there was US naval officer Richard Byrd and his pilot, Floyd Bennett,
who posted to have flown over the North Pole
but there were also some gaps in his data
a lot of over precise sexually-based results that could not be right.
Even the creators of their aircraft said they were unlikely to have done so.
And it's not like any of them could leave a flag or a marker.
The northern polar pakis, the thick ice,
not the thin ice we go through right now, the thick ice,
still flowing just around the Arctic Ocean
and it drives back and forth.
Roald Amundsen led the first expedition that provided compelling documentation
that they reached the North Pole, with airship.
But they didn't land there, they just flew over it:
It was after World War II, in 1948, when a Soviet expedition
finally set foot on the exact geographic North Pole, after being flown there.
Other explorers reached the North Pole over the pack ice, with air support,
but the first confirmed surface expedition to the North Pole without new supplies:
It took until 1986 when Will Steger after several trials,
Finally, something that most people considered was achieved
something some Edwardian explorers had accomplished decades earlier.
Today, if you have enough money, you can fly to the North Pole,
or you can take a nuclear powered icebreaker,
you can check your GPS to confirm it
And you can send a selfie back via satellite phone.
We do not want so far north aboard this ship,
And we don't have a nuclear reactor to give us enough power
to get through the thick ice up at the North Pole.
But if all the smart technology on that bridge fails,
We can still use the same technique as all the adventurers used centuries ago
and track our position with the stars.
At least where we can see them.
I'm on this trip because of Chris Hadfield's Generator Arctic,
and this man is as well!
My name is Ben Brown and I'm lucky to be here right now!
Check out his videos
he provided the amazing drone pictures for this,
links are on the screen or in the description below
-- Thanks! -- It is okay!